---
layout: post
title: A short guide on BrLP
date: 2024-12-20 15:09:00
description: How to simulate ageing and disease progression? A short guide on how to use BrLP. 
tags: disease-progression BrLP medical-imaging
categories: research
featured: true
toc:
  beginning: true
  sidebar: left
---

BrLP ([paper](https://papers.miccai.org/miccai-2024/paper/0511_paper.pdf), [code](https://github.com/LemuelPuglisi/BrLP)) is a diffusion-based spatiotemporal disease progression model capable of predicting how a 3D brain MRI will appear at a future target age, given one or more prior MRIs from a subject. In this guide, I will explain how to apply BrLP to your own MRI data using the open-source CLI application.  

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/brlp-easy.drawio.svg" class="img-fluid mt-3" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  
<div class="caption">A simple overview of what BrLP can do.</div>

### Installing the BrLP CLI

Start by cloning the GitHub repository for BrLP:

```
git clone git@github.com:LemuelPuglisi/BrLP.git
```

Next, navigate to the `BrLP` directory and install the `brlp` Python package using `pip`:

```
pip install -e .
```

This command will also install all required dependencies. Once completed, verify the installation by running:

```
brlp --help
```

If you encounter any issues, feel free to [open an issue on GitHub](https://github.com/LemuelPuglisi/BrLP/issues).

At the end of this step, our file structure will be the following:

```
.
└── BrLP/
    └── ...
```

### Downloading the models

Begin by creating a directory to store the pretrained models:

```
mkdir models
```

Next, download all the models listed in [the Pretrained Models section](https://github.com/LemuelPuglisi/BrLP?tab=readme-ov-file#pretrained-models). Make sure to unzip the auxiliary model archive (`aux-dcm.zip`) and place its contents into the `models` directory.

At the end of this step, our file structure will be the following:

```
.
└── BrLP/
└── models/
    ├── autoencoder.pth
    ├── latentdiffusion.pth
    ├── controlnet.pth
    └── dcm-aux/
        ├── dcm_ad.json
        ├── dcm_mci.json
        └── dcm_nc.json
```

### Creating the BrLP configuration file

Copy the example configuration file to the root directory:

```
cp BrLP/examples/confs.example.yaml confs.yaml
```

Open confs.yaml in a text editor and update the following fields: `autoencoder`, `unet` (refers to `diffusionmodel.pth`), `controlnet`, `aux` (cn, mci, ad). Specify the locations of the downloaded models **using absolute paths**!

At the end of this step, our file structure will be the following:

```
.
├── BrLP/
├── models/
│   ├── autoencoder.pth
│   ├── latentdiffusion.pth
│   ├── controlnet.pth
│   └── dcm-aux/
│       ├── dcm_ad.json
│       ├── dcm_mci.json
│       └── dcm_nc.json
└── confs.yaml
```

### Preparing your own data

To apply BrLP to your own T1-weighted (T1w) MRI stored as a NIfTI file, let’s assume the file is named `t1.nii.gz`. For reference, the image below shows a T1w MRI from the [IXI dataset](https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/):

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/raw-t1.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>

Since BrLP operates in the MNI152 space, you will need the MNI152 template. Download it from [this link](https://github.com/Washington-University/HCPpipelines/blob/master/global/templates/MNI152_T1_1mm_brain.nii.gz). Rename the downloaded template to `mni152.nii.gz` for simplicity.

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/mni-template.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  

Place both `t1.nii.gz` and `mni152.nii.gz` in the root directory of your workspace. After completing this step, your file structure should look like this:

```
.
├── BrLP/
├── models/
├── confs.yaml
├── t1.nii.gz
└── mni152.nii.gz
```  

### Preprocessing the MRI

All the MRIs used for the BrLP study have been preprocessed using the `turboprep` pipeline ([github](https://github.com/LemuelPuglisi/turboprep)), which is 
available via `Docker`. Start by [installing Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/). Then download the `turboprep-docker` script:

```
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/LemuelPuglisi/turboprep/refs/heads/main/turboprep-docker
```  

Make it executable:

```
chmod a+x turboprep-docker  
```

Create a folder where to store the outputs:

```
mkdir outputs
```

Finally run the script:

```bash  
./turboprep-docker t1.nii.gz outputs mni152.nii.gz  
```  

At the end of this step, our file structure will be the following:

```
.
├── BrLP/
├── models/
├── outputs/
│   ├── affine_transf.mat  
│   ├── mask.nii.gz  
│   ├── normalized.nii.gz  
│   └── segm.nii.gz
├── turboprep-docker
├── confs.yaml
├── t1.nii.gz
└── mni152.nii.gz
```

We are interested in two files: (1) `normalized.nii.gz` is the aligned, skull-stripped and intensity-normalized input image:

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/preprocessed.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  

and (2) its segmentation (obtained using [SynthSeg](https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/SynthSeg)):

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/synthseg-segm.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>

### Creating the Input CSV for BrLP

BrLP can utilize multiple MRIs from the same subject, taken at different ages, to improve its predictive performance. All MRIs must be preprocessed as described in the previous section. Additionally, the details of these MRIs—such as the subject's age at acquisition, the unique image identifier, and the file paths—must be listed in a CSV file called `inputs.csv`.

The CSV file should have the following five header columns:  

- **`image_uid` (string)**: A unique identifier for each MRI (this can be arbitrary).  
- **`age` (integer)**: The subject's age at the time of MRI acquisition.  
- **`sex` (integer)**: Use `1` for male and `2` for female.  
- **`image_path` (string)**: The absolute path to the preprocessed MRI image (e.g., `outputs/normalized.nii.gz`).  
- **`segm_path` (string)**: The absolute path to the corresponding segmentation file (e.g., `outputs/segm.nii.gz`).  

Here’s an example of how the `inputs.csv` file might look for a single MRI:  

```csv  
image_uid,age,sex,image_path,segm_path  
image_1,29,1,/absolute/path/to/outputs/normalized.nii.gz,/absolute/path/to/outputs/segm.nii.gz  
```  

After creating this file, your workspace structure will be as follows:  

```plaintext  
.  
├── BrLP/  
├── models/  
├── outputs/  
├── turboprep-docker  
├── inputs.csv  
├── confs.yaml  
├── t1.nii.gz  
└── mni152.nii.gz  
```  

### Running BrLP

First, create a directory to store the predictions:  

```bash  
mkdir predictions  
```  

In our example, our input MRI is from a 29 years old male subject, and we want to simulate the progression of this subject up to 80 years old, assuming he has Alzheimer's Disease (AD). To do this, set the following parameters:  
- `--target_diagnosis 3` (where `1` = healthy, `2` = mild cognitive impairment, `3` = Alzheimer's Disease)  
- `--target_age 80`
- `--steps 10` (to generate intermediate MRIs in 10 steps between age 29 and 80)  

Now, you can run the `brlp` command to generate the predicted MRIs:  

```bash  
brlp    --input inputs.csv \  
        --output predictions \  
        --confs confs.yaml \  
        --target_age 80 \  
        --target_diagnosis 3 \  
        --steps 10
```  

After running this command, the predicted MRIs will be saved in the `predictions` folder. You can visualize the predictions using an MRI viewer such as FSLeyes. Below are some example results from running the command:

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/pred-47.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  
<div class="caption">Prediction at age 47 (ageing + Alzheimer's Disease)</div>

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/pred-63.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  
<div class="caption">Prediction at age 63 (ageing + Alzheimer's Disease)</div>

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/pred-74.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  
<div class="caption">Prediction at age 74 (ageing + Alzheimer's Disease)</div>

<div class="row mt-3">  
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">  
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/brlp-post/pred-80.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}  
    </div>  
</div>  
<div class="caption">Prediction at age 80 (ageing + Alzheimer's Disease)</div>